Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 60 (2014) 43–52

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ymcne

A microﬂuidic based in vitro model of synaptic competition
Ainsley Coquinco a, Luba Kojic a, Wendy Wen a, Yu Tian Wang a, Noo Li Jeon b,
Austen J. Milnerwood a,c,d, Max Cynader a,⁎
a

Brain Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T-2B5, Canada
Division of World Class University Multiscale Mechanical Design, School of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Republic of Korea
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T-2B5, Canada
d
Centre for Applied Neurogenetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T-2B5, Canada
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 12 September 2013
Revised 11 March 2014
Accepted 15 March 2014
Available online 21 March 2014
Keywords:
Synaptic plasticity
Microﬂuidics
Competition

a b s t r a c t
Synaptic competition is widely believed to be central to the formation and function of neuronal networks, yet the
underlying mechanisms are poorly described. To investigate synaptic competition in vitro, we have developed a
novel two input pathway competition model using a 3-compartment microﬂuidic device. Axons from cultured
rat cortical neurons from two different lateral compartments (inputs) innervate a common neuronal population
in a separate central compartment. Inhibiting one input's activity, using the GABAAR agonist muscimol, resulted
in increased synapse numbers and axon elongation of the opposing untreated (uninhibited) inputs in the central
compartment. Time lapse imaging revealed that uninhibited inputs outgrew and outconnected their inhibited
counterparts. This form of competition occurs during a sensitive period ending prior to 21 DIV and is NMDAR
and CamKII dependent. Surprisingly, this form of plasticity was dependent on the age of the center compartment
neurons but not of the competing inputs.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
In the developing brain, neurons undergo a substantial number of
morphological and synaptic changes (Hua and Smith, 2004; Katz and
Shatz, 1996). A constant balance of synapse formation, stabilization
and elimination is required for the proper development and formation
of neural circuits (Hua and Smith, 2004). A major contribution to
these mechanisms is driven by the experience/activity/input that the
brain receives during development (Hensch, 2005). One extensively
studied example of this phenomenon occurs in the development of
the visual cortex. When one eye is closed during development, electrophysiological observations show increases in activity and territory in
favor of the open eye (Hensch, 2004; Hubel and Wiesel, 1970). These
changes are also readily observable with anatomical techniques which
show wider ocular dominance columns associated with the nondeprived eye than those related to the deprived eye (Gordon and
Stryker, 1996; Wiesel and Hubel, 1963). The mechanism by which
neural activity shapes neural circuitry during development remains a
key question to be resolved in neuroscience research.
While visual cortex plasticity is one of the more well studied models
of neural development, it is not without its own difﬁculties. Because of

the complexity of the mammalian brain, it is difﬁcult to observe changes
on cellular and molecular scales. The use of primary neuronal cultures
allows for easier observation and genetic manipulation of neurons
(Gartner et al., 2006; Okabe et al., 2001; Zeitelhofer et al., 2009). However, changing the activity of neurons in culture is limited to nonselective chemical treatment of the entire culture or genetic modiﬁcation
of a small population of neurons within the culture (Adesnik et al.,
2008; Burrone et al., 2002; Harms et al., 2005; Lee et al., 1998; Lu
et al., 2001; Otmakhov et al., 2004).
Microﬂuidic technology now provides us with the ability to grow
neurons in distinct chemical environments. Microﬂuidics is a ﬁeld of
study utilizing minute volumes to control and manipulate ﬂuid movement to create chemically isolated environments (Park et al., 2006;
Whitesides, 2006). By manipulating the volumes of the individual compartments, distinct chemical environments can be created due to the
hydrostatic forces present between compartments. Park et al. (2006)
fabricated a two compartment microﬂuidic device in which two neuronal groups could remain chemically isolated but were still allowed to
interact with each other through their axonal projections. Here, we
use a three compartment microﬂuidic device to create a new dual
input model to study in vitro synaptic competition.
Results

⁎ Corresponding author at: 2211 Wesbrook Mall, Brain Research Centre, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T-2B5, Canada.
E-mail address: cynader@brain.ubc.ca (M. Cynader).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2014.03.001
1044-7431/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Using a 3-compartment microﬂuidic device, which is a specialized
version of the multicompartment chamber ﬁrst developed by Park

