www.nature.com/scientificreports

OPEN

A directional 3D neurite outgrowth
model for studying motor axon
biology and disease
Xandor M. Spijkers1,2, Svetlana Pasteuning‑Vuhman2, Jennifa C. Dorleijn1, Paul Vulto1*,
Nienke R. Wevers1,3 & R. Jeroen Pasterkamp2*
We report a method to generate a 3D motor neuron model with segregated and directed axonal
outgrowth. iPSC-derived motor neurons are cultured in extracellular matrix gel in a microfluidic
platform. Neurons extend their axons into an adjacent layer of gel, whereas dendrites and soma
remain predominantly in the somal compartment, as verified by immunofluorescent staining. Axonal
outgrowth could be precisely quantified and was shown to respond to the chemotherapeutic drug
vincristine in a highly reproducible dose-dependent manner. The model was shown susceptible to
excitotoxicity upon exposure with excess glutamate and showed formation of stress granules upon
excess glutamate or sodium arsenite exposure, mimicking processes common in motor neuron
diseases. Importantly, outgrowing axons could be attracted and repelled through a gradient of
axonal guidance cues, such as semaphorins. The platform comprises 40 chips arranged underneath a
microtiter plate providing both throughput and compatibility to standard laboratory equipment. The
model will thus prove ideal for studying axonal biology and disease, drug discovery and regenerative
medicine.
Motor neurons project their axons to innervate other neurons and smooth- and skeletal muscle, allowing muscles
in the body to contract. Impaired motor neuron function due to nerve injury or disease, affects voluntary movement and can cause paralysis. Although peripheral nerves are able to regenerate after injury, complete recovery
does not o
­ ccur1–3. Disease is another cause of disrupted motor neuron and axon function. In amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), upper and lower motor neurons undergo progressive degeneration leading to muscle denervation, paralysis and death within 3–5 years after d
­ iagnosis4,5. Although exact causes are still unknown, aberrances
in axonal stability, axonal transport, and axon growth dynamics have been reported amongst other ­hallmarks5–10.
Accordingly, there is an increased research interest in studying axonal repair after peripheral nerve injury, as
well as in studying axonal pathology in ALS. In vitro models that are relevant in their physiological behavior
and allow spatially segregated interrogation of motor neuron somata and axons, are critical in advancing our
understanding of peripheral nerve injury and disease, and in developing novel curing or regenerating therapies.
The introduction of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology and subsequent differentiation into
human motor neurons provides a unique opportunity to study motor neuron disease and nerve regeneration
mechanisms. In particular, the generation of iPSC-derived motor neurons from patients carrying specific mutations is a powerful tool for in vitro disease modeling. Most studies have focused on iPSC-derived lower motor
neurons to study ALS. Lower motor neurons from familial ALS patients carrying superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)
mutations showed various disease phenotypes compared to healthy controls, including reduced survival, abnormal mitochondrial mobility and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) s­ tress11,12. Lower motor neurons derived from
patients carrying a mutation in the fused in sarcoma (FUS) gene showed cytoplasmic mislocalization of FUS and
accumulation into SGs, in addition to aberrant axonal transport of mitochondria and ER v­ esicles13,14. Relevant
disease phenotypes were also observed using iPSC technology for other common mutations in familial ALS,
such as chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72) and TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43) mutations.
An extensive overview of this topic is provided e­ lsewhere15.
Despite recent developments in iPSC technology, progress in dissecting ALS disease mechanisms, or in
developing efficient therapies, is often hampered by a lack of relevant and scalable in vitro platforms that can
rapidly be used to study axonal pathology. Two-dimensional culture platforms have been used extensively to
1
MIMETAS BV, Organ-On-a-Chip Company, 2333 CH Leiden, The Netherlands. 2Department of Translational
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht Brain Center, Utrecht University, 3584 CG Utrecht, The
Netherlands. 3Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Einthovenweg 20, 2333
ZC Leiden, The Netherlands. *email: p.vulto@mimetas.com; r.j.pasterkamp@umcutrecht.nl

Scientific Reports |

(2021) 11:2080

| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81335-z

1
Vol.:(0123456789)

