HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Lab Chip. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Lab Chip. 2015 July 7; 15(13): 2781–2789. doi:10.1039/c5lc00503e.

Passive microfluidic chamber for long-term imaging of axon
guidance in response to soluble gradients
A. M. Taylora,c,d, S. Menonb, and S. L. Guptonb,c,e
A. M. Taylor: amtaylor@unc.edu; S. L. Gupton: sgupton@email.unc.edu
aUNC/NCSU Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, UNC-Chapel Hill, Campus Box 7575,

Chapel Hill NC 27599-7575, USA

Author Manuscript

bUNC Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, UNC-Chapel Hill, Campus Box 7545, Chapel

Hill, NC 27599-7545, USA
cUNC Neuroscience Center, USA
dCarolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, USA
eUNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Understanding how axons are guided to target locations within the brain is of fundamental
importance for neuroscience, and is a widely studied area of research. Biologists have an unmet
need for reliable and easily accessible methods that generate stable, soluble molecular gradients
for the investigation of axon guidance. Here we developed a microfluidic device with contiguous
media-filled compartments that uses gravity-driven flow to generate a stable and highly
reproducible gradient within a viewing compartment only accessible to axons. This device uses
high-resistance microgrooves to both direct the growth of axons into an isolated region and to
generate a stable gradient within the fluidically isolated axon viewing compartment for over 22 h.
Establishing a stable gradient relies on a simple and quick pipetting procedure with no external
pump or tubing. Since the axons extend into the axonal compartment through aligned microgrooves, the analysis of turning is simplified. Further, the multiple microgrooves in parallel
alignment serve to increase sample sizes, improving statistical analyses. We used this method to
examine growth cone turning in response to the secreted axon guidance cue netrin-1. We report the
novel finding that growth cones of embryonic mouse cortical axons exhibited attractive turning in
the lower concentrations of netrin-1, but were repulsed when exposed to higher concentrations. We
also performed immunocytochemistry in growth cones exposed to a netrin-1 gradient within the
axon viewing compartment and show that netrin receptors associated with both attraction and
repulsion, DCC and UNC5H, localized to these growth cones. Together, we developed an
accessible gradient chamber for higher throughput axon guidance studies and demonstrated its
capabilities.

Correspondence to: A. M. Taylor, amtaylor@unc.edu; S. L. Gupton, sgupton@email.unc.edu.
Yes there is potential competing interest. A.M.T. is an inventor of microfluidic chambers to compartmentalize neurons (US 7419822
B2) and has financial interest in Xona Microfluidics, LLC. S.M. and S.L.G. declare no competing financial interests.

