Proceedings of the 3rd Annual
IEEE Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
Scottsdale, AZ, USA, Sept 22-25, 2007

MoRP-B01.2

Characterization of Program Controlled CO2 Laser-Cut PDMS
Channels for Lab-on-a-chip Applications
Andrew W. Holle, Shih-Hui Chao, Mark R. Holl, IEEE Member,
Jeffrey M. Houkal, and Deirdre R. Meldrum, IEEE Fellow
ac

Abstract—PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) is an important
material for lab-on-a-chip, an emerging technology to automate
biological and chemical operations in microfluidic devices.
Laser manufacturing of materials suitable for use in laminatebased construction of lab-on-a-chip devices is an important step
in the development of automated assembly line procedures.
This study investigates the effect of laser cutting parameters on
channel topography when a carbon dioxide laser is used to
create trenches in PDMS. We present cross-sectional
micrographs of the laser-ablated channels that reveal a
modified Gaussian contour, with smooth, circular arcs at the
bottom of the channel. We define geometric parameters that
describe the contours, including cut depth and maximum cut
width. Relationships between laser power, pulses per inch, and
laser traverse speed and ablation profile patterns are
established. A strong linear relationship (R2=0.9951) between
cut depth and laser power is demonstrated. Analysis of the
radii of circular arcs at the bottom of the channel and at the
surface of the PDMS was performed. As laser power density is
increased (increase in laser power or pulses per inch) the
PDMS surface radii and channel floor radius decrease.

L

I. INTRODUCTION

ab-on-a-chip is a rapidly emerging field in which small
(micro and nanoliter scale) volumes of fluids are
manipulated for the sake of an experiment. In order to
manipulate fluids on this scale, channels with appropriate
dimensions (typically 10 to 100 micrometers) are needed.
The silicon-based organic polymer PDMS has been used
extensively in lab-on-a-chip applications. Small features in
PDMS are commonly achieved photolithographically, but
this is time consuming and costly.
Laser cutting has been used as an alternative to
photolithography.
Past works have focused on the
engraving of PDMS with lasers, but the majority of them

Manuscript received March 18, 2007. This work was supported in part
by the National Institutes of Health NHGRI Centers of Excellence in
Genomic Science (Grant 5 P50 HG002360, D. Meldrum (PI)).
A.W. Holle is with the Harrington Department of Bioengineering,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-9309 USA. (e-mail:
Andrew.Holle@asu.edu; phone: 860-861-1303)
D.R. Meldrum is Director of the Center for Ecogenomics and the Dean
of the Ira A. Fulton School of Engineering, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ 85287-9309 USA (e-mail: Deirdre.meldrum@asu.edu)
S.H. Chao, J.M. Houkal, and M.R. Holl are with the Center for
Ecogenomics, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ 85287-6501 USA (e-mail: joe.chao@asu.edu; jeff.houkal@asu.edu;
mark.holl@asu.edu).

1-4244-1154-8/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE.

utilize expensive Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser systems [1].
Wolfe et al. used a femtosecond laser to etch channels in
PDMS and to produce intricate 2D patterns for lab-on-achip applications [2], but this research did not characterize
channel geometry. Kim, Campbell, Groisman, Kleinfeld and
Schaffer also utilized a femtosecond laser to build
unmoldable features into microfluidc devices [3]. This work
addressed soft lithography’s inability to realize 3D
structures. Femtosecond lasers were utilized in Nguyen et
al.’s research on bioreactors [4]. Seven polymer layers, four
of them PDMS, were machined with femtosecond lasers,
then stacked and bonded to form a complex bioreactor. This
work proposed a five-minute ultrasonic cleaning to remove
debris from the PDMS. While both of these works address
certain challenges with the laser machining of PDMS,
neither attempts to increase understanding of the channel
dimensions and topography that laser cutting provides.
Other works have addressed channel characteristics of
laser-machined polymers. Chan, Nguyen, Xia, and Wu used
a CO2 laser similar to the one used in this investigation to
micromachine
channels
in
PMMA
(Polymethylmethacrylate) for use in fuel cells [5]. These
channels exhibited a distinctive Gaussian profile. Channel
cross sections were shown but not quantitatively
characterized or modeled.
Still other works have set out to understand selected
characteristics of the surfaces of laser machined polymers.
Pugmire, Waddell, Haasch, Tarlov, and Locascio analyzed
the surface chemistry and electroosmotic flow characteristics
of channels cut into several polymers [6], including PMMA,
PETG
(polyethylene
terephthalate
glycol),
PC
(polycarbonate), and PVC (polyvinyl chloride). PDMS was
not characterized. Pham et al. correlated laser ablation rate
with the thermal properties of several polymers, including
PDMS [7].
Graubner et al. quantified the relationship between pulse
number and feature depth for isolated laser-ablated holes in
PDMS [8]. An Nd:YAG laser was used to machine single
holes into PDMS. Using this design, plots of depth vs.
number of pulses were generated. Hole profiles and lateral
dimensions were not analyzed.
The CO2 laser is a cost-effective option for fabricating
PDMS channels with widths larger than 100 micrometers.
We characterized the topography of laser-cut channels at
various laser settings. Data of the type presented here may
be helpful in laser parameter selection for creating channels
in PDMS sheets.

621

Authorized licensed use limited to: McGill Libraries. Downloaded on August 15,2024 at 23:04:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

