This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

pubs.acs.org/chemneuro

Research Article

A Microfluidic High-Capacity Screening Platform for Neurological
Disorders
Lydia Moll, Johan Pihl, Mattias Karlsson, Paul Karila, and Camilla I. Svensson*
Cite This: ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2024, 15, 236−244

ACCESS

Metrics & More

Read Online

Article Recommendations

sı Supporting Information
*

ABSTRACT: Compartmentalized cell cultures (CCCs) provide the
possibility to study mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases, such as
spreading of misfolded proteins in Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease
or functional changes in, e.g., chronic pain, in vitro. However, many
CCC devices do not provide the necessary capacity for identifying
novel mechanisms, targets, or drugs in a drug discovery context. Here,
we present a high-capacity cell culture microtiter microfluidic plate
compliant with American National Standard Institute of the Society
for Laboratory Automation and Screening (ANSI/SLAS) standards
that allows to parallelize up to 96 CCCs/experimental units, where
each experimental unit comprises three microchannel-connected
compartments. The plate design allows the specific treatment of
cells in individual compartments through the application of a fluidic
barrier. Moreover, the compatibility of the plate with neuronal cultures was confirmed with rodent primary as well as human-induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons of the central or peripheral nervous system for up to 14 days in culture. Using
immunocytochemistry, we demonstrated that the plate design restricts neuronal soma to individual compartments, while axons, but
not dendrites, can grow through the connecting microchannels to neighboring compartments. In addition, we show that neurons are
spontaneously active and, as deemed by the appearance of synchronous depolarizations in neighboring compartments, are
synaptically coupled. In summary, the design of the microfluidic plate allows for both morphological and functional studies of
neurological in vitro cultures with increased capacity to support identification of novel mechanisms, targets, or drugs.
KEYWORDS: microfluidics, neurological disorders, drug discovery, plate-based screening, electrophysiology, in vitro systems

M

odeling aspects of neurological diseases (NDs), such as
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD),
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and chronic pain in vitro, is
challenging. Compartmentalized cell cultures (CCCs) present a
promising approach for advancing in vitro research on new
mechanisms and targets in the quest to develop new drugs and
alleviate NDs. However, the current limitations on available
devices, including their low capacity, hinder their applicability in
high-throughput drug discovery.1,2
In CCCs, discrete cell culture regions are connected via
microchannels with diameters large enough to establish a fluidic
connection between the regions but sufficiently small to restrict
cell migration. This enables spatial and temporal separation of
cellular regions (such as soma and axons) or different cell
populations while allowing cellular communication between
these.3
The use of CCCs allows for the study of various key
mechanisms of NDs including the uptake, aggregation, axonal
transport, and cell-to-cell spreading of misfolded proteins.4−6
Additionally, CCCs are employed to investigate axonal
degeneration and regeneration,7,8 as well as the transport of
proteins, ion channels, and organelles along axons.9,10
Furthermore, CCCs can be utilized to evaluate functional
© 2023 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society

aspects such as neuronal excitability and cellular communication
between distinct neuronal populations or between neurons and
non-neuronal cells11,12 (for extensive reviews on CCC
applications in NDs, see refs 3,13−15).
Currently used CCC devices frequently have complex designs
that come with the trade-off of limited capacity. While they are
primarily utilized for basic research applications, the limited
capacity is a barrier to employing these CCC models in target
and drug screening contexts.2 Therefore, increased capacity is
necessary, not only through the scale-up and parallelization of
CCC devices but also by considering compatibility with robotic
liquid handling and laboratory automation.1 Moreover, it
requires robust manufacturing and materials to ensure reliable
and reproducible results.1
Received: June 14, 2023
Revised: November 20, 2023
Accepted: December 5, 2023
Published: December 27, 2023

236

https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.3c00409
ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2024, 15, 236−244

