MNE 15 (2022) 100124

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Micro and Nano Engineering
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/micro-and-nano-engineering

Hybrid microfabrication of 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes by
photolithography and additive manufacturing
Jesper Y. Pan a, Babak Rezaei a, Thomas A. Anhøj a, Niels B. Larsen b, Stephan S. Keller a, *
a
b

DTU Nanolab, National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby 2800, Denmark
DTU Health Tech, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby 2800, Denmark

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Additive manufacturing
CMEMS
Pyrolytic carbon
SU-8

We report a novel hybrid method for fabricating high aspect ratio 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes combining UV
photolithography and additive manufacturing with commercially available SLA 3D printers and materials. By
using a 3D printed chip holder, aligned 3D printing on a patterned silicon chip was possible. This allowed for the
fabrication of cylindrical polymer micropillars with a height of 2173 ± 26 μm and a width of 316 ± 11 μm on
SU-8 precursor structures defining the leads, contact pads and underlying 2D electrode prepared using UV
lithography. Microfabrication of 3D structures with these dimensions is impossible to achieve with SU-8
photolithography alone. The hybrid polymer structures were converted into 3D carbon electrodes with high
structural integrity using a 3-step pyrolysis process optimized for the specific 3D print resin. During this process,
the micropillars shrunk to 30 ± 3% in height and 35 ± 1% in width of the polymer precursor structures, while
maintaining the macroscopic shape and microscopic surface roughness. Electrochemical experiments confirmed
that the pyrolytic carbon formed a monolithic conductive 3D electrode. The surface roughness contributed to a
17 ± 5% increase in electroactive surface area compared to the geometrical surface area of the micropillars.

1. Introduction
The microfabrication of 3D electrodes with large surface area is of
high relevance for most applications involving electrochemistry. For
electrochemical storage, supercapacitors have been proposed as a
simpler and more sustainable alternative to batteries. In order to achieve
high energy density, well defined, conductive, high surface area struc­
tures are needed [1]. In electrochemical sensing, increased electrode
surface area has contributed to improved sensor performance [2].
During electrochemical monitoring of cells or electrical stimulation of
cells in organ-on-chip models, 3D electrode configurations allow for
shorter diffusion distances for a larger fraction of the cell cultures [3]. In
many of these applications, carbon has been established as a promising
electrode material due to its high chemical stability and inertness, a
large electrochemical potential window, reasonable electrical conduc­
tivity and inherent biocompatibility [4–6].
Various microfabrication methods have been proposed for the
fabrication of 3D carbon electrodes such as carbonization of electrospun
fibers [7] and synthesis of graphene foams using chemical vapor depo­
sition [8]. While these methods are excellent in producing highly porous
carbon structures, they are not suitable for integration of electrodes with

a well-defined electrode geometry on a chip. In the so-called carbon
MEMS (CMEMS) process, photoresist precursor structures are converted
into carbon electrodes through pyrolysis at temperatures >900 ◦ C in an
inert atmosphere [9,10]. The main advantage of this approach is that the
electrode geometry is defined by well-established microfabrication
methods such as UV photolithography. Furthermore, the electrical and
electrochemical properties of the resulting 3D pyrolytic carbon elec­
trodes are largely dependent on the precursor material and the pyrolysis
conditions and can therefore be optimized for a specific application
[11,12].
The negative epoxy photoresist SU-8 has been extensively explored
for the CMEMS process, as it is possible to construct stable high aspect
ratio polymer structures using UV photolithography, which then are
converted to carbon through a pyrolysis process [13]. 3D pyrolytic
carbon electrodes based on SU-8 polymer precursor have among others
been applied for dielectrophoresis [14], as scaffolds for electrochemical
monitoring of 3D cell cultures [3,15], for on-chip microsupercapacitors
[16] or for enzymatic biosensing [17]. However, using this method the
resolution and aspect ratio are limited by the SU-8 photolithography
process, which makes it impractical to fabricate carbon electrodes with a
height > 300 μm.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: suke@dtu.dk (J.Y. Pan), suke@dtu.dk (S.S. Keller).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mne.2022.100124
Received 25 November 2021; Received in revised form 27 February 2022; Accepted 7 March 2022
Available online 10 March 2022
2590-0072/© 2022 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

