Japanese Journal of Applied
Physics

You may also like

REGULAR PAPER

Seamless fabrication technique for micro to
millimeter structures by combining 3D printing and
photolithography
To cite this article: Takahiro Tamura and Takaaki Suzuki 2019 Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58 SDDL10

- Microfluidic viscometers for biochemical
and biomedical applications: A review
S B Puneeth, Madhusudan B Kulkarni and
Sanket Goel
- Hard magnetics and soft materials—a
synergy
P Narayanan, R Pramanik and A
Arockiarajan
- Organic photodiodes: printing, coating,
benchmarks, and applications
Noah Strobel, Mervin Seiberlich, Ralph
Eckstein et al.

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

This content was downloaded from IP address 24.231.98.89 on 15/08/2024 at 22:43

REGULAR PAPER

Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 58, SDDL10 (2019)
https://doi.org/10.7567/1347-4065/ab09d0

Seamless fabrication technique for micro to millimeter structures by combining 3D
printing and photolithography
Takahiro Tamura1 and Takaaki Suzuki1,2*
1

Division of Mechanical Science and Technology, Gunma University, Kiryu, Gunma, Japan
Japan Science and Technology Agency, PRESTO, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan

2
*

E-mail: suzuki.taka@gunma-u.ac.jp

Received November 30, 2018; revised January 29, 2019; accepted February 6, 2019; published online June 10, 2019
This paper proposes a seamless fabrication technique for micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) devices having structures from micrometer
to millimeter with a single material by combining 3D printing and photolithography. The proposed fabrication technique combines the fabrication
characteristics of 3D printing and photolithography. We fabricated a mold of a microfluidic device having micro- and millimeter structures and
evaluated three characteristics of the proposed technique. From the evaluations, the micro- to millimeter structures were seamlessly fabricated with
an error within ±5%. The rough surface of the resist transferred from a 3D-printed master mold causes irregular reflection of UV light and reduction
in patterning accuracy. The relation of object shape and fabrication of millimeter structures was evaluated. In addition, various advantages of the
proposed fabrication technique were confirmed by demonstrating a fluid transportation test for the fabricated microfludic device.
© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

1. Introduction

In the past decades, many micro-electro-mechanical systems
(MEMS) devices have been developed1–7) because of their
many advantages such as miniaturization, power saving,
higher functionality, and lower cost. These MEMS devices
having structures from sub-micrometer to sub-millimeter are
often fabricated by photolithography,3–7) electron-beam
lithography,2,6,8) and embossing.9,10) Recently, in addition
to these fabrication techniques, 3D printing is beginning to be
widely used11–16) in the MEMS ﬁeld to conveniently
fabricate prototype devices and complex devices having
structures from sub-millimeter to millimeter. However, in
most cases, these fabrication techniques exist independently and
each of them has the limitation of the fabrication size and shape.
These limitations in fabrication often cause problems when
fabricating devices. For example, in the ﬁeld of bio-MEMS,
connections between macroscale external devices and microscale ﬂuidic devices (known as the macro-to-micro interface,
interconnect, connector, or world-to-chip interface) have been
reported as a problem.17–19) Also, the fabrication of a microﬂuidic device having micrometer structures by 3D printing has
been reported as a problem.20,21)
These fabrication techniques are mapped in three
aspects22) as shown in Fig. 1. The horizontal axis is relative
accuracy, which is object size divided by tolerance. The right
side of the ﬁgure indicates that accurate fabrication is
performed on a design value. The vertical axis is object
size and indicates the range of fabricable sizes using each
fabrication technique. The red color indicates that arbitrary
complex structures are fabricated. As shown in the ﬁgure,
photolithography fabricates simple structures from sub-micrometer to sub-millimeter. However, it is difﬁcult to
fabricate 3D millimeter structures by photolithography23)
due to several factors, e.g. ﬁlm thickness distribution of
deposited thick ﬁlm, optical attenuation of photoresist in the
vertical direction, diffraction of light, and depth of focus for
thick ﬁlm. On the other hand, consumer-grade desktop 3D
printers fabricate structures from sub-millimeter to centimeter
with high complexity.12,14) However, it is difﬁcult to
fabricate micrometer structures precisely.20,21) These two

Fig. 1. (Color online) Purpose of this study. The horizontal axis is relative
accuracy, the vertical axis is object size, and the color shows the ability to
fabricate complex structures. Photolithography fabricates simple structures
from sub-micrometer to sub-millimeter. On the other hand, consumer-grade
desktop 3D printers fabricate sub-millimeter to centimeter structures with
high complexity. The proposed fabrication technique realizes seamless
fabrication from micrometer to millimeter with a single material by
combining 3D printing and photolithography, indicated by hatching.

fabrication techniques overlap in the area of sub-millimeter
but exist independently. Therefore, it is difﬁcult for each
technique to fabricate structures seamlessly from micrometer
to millimeter.
In this study, we propose a seamless fabrication technique
from micrometer to millimeter with a single material by
combining 3D printing and photolithography, as indicated by
the hatching in Fig. 1. 3D printing and photolithography,
which are the base of the proposed technique, have different
characteristics. The proposed fabrication technique combines
these two techniques and has mixed characteristics of each
technique. So, we fabricated a mold for a microﬂuidic device
having micrometer and millimeter structures by the proposed
technique and evaluated three characteristics: the fabrication
accuracy, surface roughness, and object shape. In the

SDDL10-1

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SDDL10 (2019)

T. Tamura and T. Suzuki

Fig. 2. (Color online) Principle of the proposed technique. SU-8 millimeter
structures are fabricated by SU-8 molding with a PDMS mold that is replicamolded with a 3D-printed master mold. Micrometer structures are fabricated
in the molded SU-8 by photolithography.

evaluation of the fabrication accuracy, the designed and
measured values of the fabricated micrometer and millimeter
structures are compared. Moreover, a microﬂuidic device was
fabricated as one of several applications of the proposed
technique to conﬁrm the various advantages. Concretely, the
proposed fabrication technique realizes seamless fabrication
of micrometer and millimeter structures without assembly for
a complex microﬂuidic device. In addition, the proposed
technique realizes complex and ﬁne structures by combining
3D printing and photolithography.
2. Experimental methods
2.1. Principle of fabrication technique

The proposed fabrication technique is based on a combination of 3D printing and photolithography using thick negative
photoresist SU-8 (MicroChem Corp.). As shown in the
schematic in Fig. 2, SU-8 millimeter structures are fabricated
by SU-8 molding with a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mold
that is replica-molded with a 3D-printed master mold. SU-8 is
widely used for fabricating MEMS devices as a thick
negative photoresist.24) In addition, SU-8 micrometer structures are fabricated by photolithography. In other words,
millimeter structures are fabricated by SU-8 molding with the
3D-printed master mold and micrometer structures are
incorporated in the molded SU-8 by photolithography. So,
a seamless fabrication technique of structures from micro- to
millimeter made of a single material is realized by combining
3D printing and photolithography.
2.2. Fabrication process
Figure 3 shows a process ﬂow of the proposed fabrication
technique. Firstly, a master mold is designed with STL ﬁle
format by 3D-CAD software (Inventor professional, Autodesk)
and printed using a 3D printer (Form 2, Formlabs) with 25 μm
height of one layer [Fig. 3(a)]. In the 3D printing, standard clear
resin (FLGPCL04, Formlabs) is used. This master mold has
structures from sub-millimeter to millimeter size precisely
fabricated by a consumer-grade desktop 3D printer,20,21) then
a PDMS (SILPOT 184, Dow Corning) mold is fabricated by
replica molding25,26) [Fig. 3(b)]. Next, liquid SU-8 (SU-8 3005,

MicroChem) is poured into the millimeter structures and baked
at 95 °C for 2 h [Fig. 3(c)]. After baking the SU-8, the level of
SU-8 liquid surfaces decreases by losing the solvent.27)
Therefore, pouring and baking SU-8 is repeated until the
distance between the PDMS mold surface and the baked SU-8
surface becomes 1 mm or less. After SU-8 cooling, ultraviolet
(UV) light is exposed to the baked SU-8 with ⩾2000 mJ cm−2
(wavelength 365 nm) which is a sufﬁcient exposure dose for
the millimeter-thick SU-8 [Fig. 3(d)]. After that, SU-8 is baked
at 65 °C for 1 min and 95 °C for 6 min. As a result, SU-8
millimeter structures are fabricated. Next, SU-8 (SU-8 3050,
MicroChem) is coated with a thickness of 200 μm or more on a
Cr-patterned glass substrate and baked at 95 °C for 2 h
[Figs. 3(e) and 3(f)]. After SU-8 cooling, the SU-8-coated
substrate and the PDMS mold are bonded. After that, pressure
is applied to the substrate under a vacuum to degas28) the air
inside the substrate and the PDMS mold for 10 min [Fig. 3(g)].
After degassing, pressure is applied with 0.1 kPa to the
substrate and the SU-8 is baked at 95 °C for an hour using
an oven [Fig. 3(h)]. As a result, the uncrosslinked SU-8
exceeds the glass transition temperature27) and ﬂows into the
patterns on the PDMS mold.29) After SU-8 cooling, the PDMS
mold and the substrate are separated. After that, UV light is
exposed with a normal exposure dose for an SU-8 submillimeter thickness from the back side of the Cr-patterned
glass substrate30) [Fig. 3(i)]. The SU-8 pattern molded with the
PDMS mold is designed to cover the Cr pattern on the
substrate. Therefore, the shape of the micrometer structures is
determined by photolithography. Then, the SU-8 is baked at
65 °C for 1 min and 95 °C for 6 min [Fig. 3(j)]. After cooling
the SU-8 for 30 min, it is developed with SU-8 developer
(MicroChem) for 10 min and then rinsed with isopropyl alcohol
(Kanto Chemical) for 1 min, two times [Fig. 3(k)]. Through the
process, micrometer structures and millimeter structures are
seamlessly fabricated with the single material.
2.3. Evaluation
In general, 3D printing and photolithography, which are the
base of the proposed technique, have different characteristics
in terms of their object size, surface roughness, and object
shape, as shown in Table I. The proposed fabrication
technique combining 3D printing and photolithography has
mixed characteristics from each technique.
By using the proposed fabrication technique, a mold of a
microﬂuidic device having micro- and millimeter structures
was fabricated as shown in Fig. 4(a). Also, the characteristics
of the proposed fabrication technique (1)–(3) were evaluated
as shown in Fig. 4(b). First, to evaluate the fabrication
accuracy, the structures on the fabricated device were
observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM)
(JCM-5700LV, JEOL) and designed and measured values
of the structures were compared. Second, to evaluate the
effect of the resist surface roughness on the micrometer
structures, two devices fabricated using a surface-treated
master mold and a master mold without surface treatment
were compared. Third, the relationship between object shape
and fabrication was evaluated by three types of structures
with three aspect ratios. Finally, a PDMS microﬂuidic device
was fabricated by soft lithography25) using the microﬂuidic
mold fabricated by the proposed technique. The PDMS
microﬂuidic device and a glass substrate were bonded by
oxygen-plasma treatment31) using a dry etching system

SDDL10-2

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SDDL10 (2019)

T. Tamura and T. Suzuki

Fig. 3. (Color online) Process ﬂow of the proposed technique. (a) Master mold fabricated with a 3D printer. (b) PDMS mold fabricated by replica molding.
(c) Liquid SU-8 is poured and baked. (d) Soft-baked SU-8 exposed to UV light. (e), (f) Coated and soft-baked SU-8 prepared on a Cr-patterned glass substrate.
(g) Pressure and vacuum are applied. (h) Bonded SU-8 is baked under pressure. (i) PDMS mold and substrate are separated, then soft-baked SU-8 is exposed to
UV light from the back side. (j) Post-exposure baking of SU-8. (k) Development of SU-8.
Table I.

Characteristics of fabrication technique. AR: aspect ratio.

(1) Object size (fabricate with
accuracy)
(2) Surface roughness
(3) Object shape

3D printing

Photolithography

Sub-mm to cm

Sub-μm to sub-mm

Micrometer-order
Complex, high
AR

Nanometer-order
Simple, low AR

(ES401, Nippon Scientiﬁc). A suspension having microspheres with a diameter of 2 μm (G0200, Thermo Fisher) was
injected in the channel of the fabricated microﬂuidic device
using a syringe pump (KDS270, KD Scientiﬁc) at the ﬂow
rate of 1 μl min−1 and the channel was observed using an
inverted system microscope (IX-71, Olympus) and a chargecoupled device camera (DP72, Olympus).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Fabrication accuracy

To evaluate the fabrication accuracy, the structures on the
fabricated device were observed using SEM, and designed
and measured values of the structures were compared. The

prototype mold has a channel with micrometer line-andspaces and millimeter interfaces. Figure 5(a) shows a
photograph of the prototype mold for the microﬂuidic device,
and Figs. 5(b)–5(d) and 5(e) show SEM images of the lineand-spaces and interfaces of the fabricated device. As shown
in Fig. 5, the micrometer structures and the millimeter
structures were seamlessly and simultaneously fabricated
with the single material. In addition, Table II shows the
comparison of the measured values that were obtained from
the SEM images and the designed values. As shown in
Table II, both micrometer and millimeter structures were
fabricated with an error within ±5%. Photolithography and
3D printing have a different range of fabrication sizes, and in
the proposed technique, micrometer structures are fabricated
by photolithography and millimeter structures are fabricated
by 3D printing. As a result, high fabrication accuracy is
obtained with a wide range.
3.2. Surface roughness
The effect of the resist surface roughness on micrometer
structures was evaluated. As we mentioned, a master mold
was fabricated by 3D printing. As a result, the surface of the

SDDL10-3

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SDDL10 (2019)

T. Tamura and T. Suzuki

Fig. 4. (Color online) Evaluation of fabrication characteristics. (a) Schematic of a prototype microﬂuidic device mold. (b) Fabrication characteristics of the
proposed fabrication technique. (1) Object size, (2) surface roughness, (3) object shape.

Fig. 5. (Color online) Evaluation of fabrication accuracy. (a) Photograph of the prototype mold for a microﬂuidic device. (b)–(d) SEM images of micrometer
line-and-space in the channel from the top surface. Line widths of designed values are (b) 100 μm, (c) 50 μm, (d) 25 μm. (e) SEM image of cross-sectional
view of millimeter interface. Designed value of interface diameter is 2 mm.
Table II.

Comparison between designed and measured dimensions.
Line-and-space in the
channel (μm)

Designed size
Measured size
Error

100
98
−2%

50
49
−2%

25
24
−4%

Interface diameter (mm)
2.00
1.96
−2%

master mold is rough20,32) and this roughness is transferred to
the SU-8 surface. In this evaluation, two devices fabricated
using a polished mold and an unpolished mold were
compared to evaluate the effect of surface roughness on
micrometer structures. The mold surface was polished with a
cloth using liquid metal polish (Pikal, Nihon Maryo-Kogyo)
until the surface had luster. Figure 6 shows SEM images of
the fabricated devices. The devices shown in Figs. 6(a) and
6(b) were fabricated with the polished master mold and
unpolished master mold, respectively. The top image shows
the SEM image from above of the device, the bottom left
image shows the SEM image from diagonally above with
high magniﬁcation, and the bottom right ﬁgure shows the
behavior of the UV light when the micrometer structures
are exposed. From Fig. 6(a), the surface of the fabricated
device using the polished mold is relatively smooth, and the

micrometer structures were fabricated without roughness. On
the other hand, the surface of the device fabricated with the
unpolished mold is rough, and the fabricated micrometer
structures are also rough, as shown in Fig. 6(b). This is
because irregular reﬂection occurred on the rough resist
surface. UV light is incident from the back side, then passes
through the resist and reaches the resist surface. When the
resist surface is rough, UV light irregularly reﬂects at the
rough resist surface and exposes masked areas. As a result,
rough micrometer structures were fabricated as shown in
Fig. 6(b). From the evaluation, it is necessary to perform
surface treatment on the master mold to fabricate micrometer
structures precisely.
3.3. Object shape
The object shape of the fabricated millimeter structures was
evaluated. As shown in Fig. 3, millimeter structures are
fabricated by molding with a 3D-printed master mold. As a
result, millimeter structures could break at the separation of a
PDMS mold and a substrate [Figs. 3(h) and 3(i)]. In this
evaluation, three types of structures were fabricated with
three aspect ratios to evaluate millimeter structure fabrication.
Figure 7(a) shows the cross-sectional views of the fabricated
devices arranged by the shape of millimeter structures and the
aspect ratio. Additionally, Fig. 7(b) shows the equipment

SDDL10-4

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SDDL10 (2019)

T. Tamura and T. Suzuki

Fig. 6. (Color online) Effect of resist surface roughness on micrometer structures. (a) SEM images of the fabricated device using a polished mold. (b) SEM
images of the fabricated device using an unpolished mold. Irregular reﬂection occurred at the rough resist surface and the masked area is also exposed.

Fig. 7. (Color online) Object shape and fabrication of structures. (a) Cross-sectional views of the fabricated structures. Three types of millimeter structures
(cylinder, square pole, and cone) were fabricated with three aspect ratios (AR: 1, 3 and 5) to evaluate millimeter structure fabrication. (b) Equipment for
separation of PDMS mold and a glass substrate. (c) Schematic of the three types of resistance forces acting on millimeter structures when separating a PDMS
mold and a substrate. (d) Surface area per bottom area loading the resistance forces as a function of the aspect ratio of the millimeter structures.

SDDL10-5

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SDDL10 (2019)

T. Tamura and T. Suzuki

Fig. 8. (Color online) Observation of fracture surface of millimeter structure. (a) Schematic of the SEM observation point of the millimeter structures
remaining in the PDMS mold after being broken on separation, and the crosslinked SU-8 fracture surface of the structure. (b) SEM images of the crosslinked
SU-8 fracture surface. The left image was observed from above and the right image was observed from diagonally above with high magniﬁcation.

used for the separation of a PDMS mold and a glass substrate
with SU-8 millimeter structures. The PDMS mold is ﬁxed on
the stage using four fasteners and a glass substrate is ﬁxed by
negative pressure, then the glass substrate is vertically pulled
up by the Z stage.
As shown in Fig. 7(a), regarding the aspect ratio 5 with
10 mm height structures, only the cone structure was
fabricated and the other two structures were broken when
separating the PDMS mold and the substrate. There are two
reasons for this. The ﬁrst is resistance forces acting on the
millimeter structures upon separation. As shown in the left of
Fig. 7(c), there are a maximum of three types of resistance
forces (adhesive force, friction force, and force required to
deform a PDMS mold) acting on millimeter structures when
separating a PDMS mold and a substrate. From the difference
in the shape, the adhesive force and friction force act on the
cylinder and square pole [upper right of Fig. 7(c)], whereas
only the adhesive force acts on the cone [bottom right of
Fig. 7(c)]. The second reason is the difference of surface area
where resistance forces act. Figure 7(d) shows the surface
area of the millimeter structures. The horizontal axis is the
aspect ratio of the millimeter structures, the vertical axis is
the surface area per bottom area. The plots show that the red
triangle is the cylinder, the blue square is the square pole, and
the black circle is the cone. As shown in the ﬁgure, the
surface area per bottom area of the cone where resistance
forces act is half that of the other structures. For these
reasons, the SU-8 cone structure could be fabricated with
aspect ratio 5, 10 mm height.

In addition, the fracture surface of the millimeter structure
which remained in the PDMS mold was observed using SEM
as shown in Fig. 8(a) and SEM images were obtained as
shown in Fig. 8(b). The left image of Fig. 8(b) was observed
from above and the right image was observed from diagonally above with high magniﬁcation. From the SEM images
the breaking of the millimeter structure basically occurred at
the boundary between the crosslinked SU-8 at the mold side
and the uncrosslinked SU-8 at the bonding step as shown in
Fig. 3(g). Since the millimeter structures are fabricated by
pouring SU-8 into the PDMS mold and molding, the end face
of the molded SU-8 has a smooth meniscus shape as shown
in Fig. 8(b). Therefore, the crosslinked SU-8 and the
uncrosslinked SU-8 are the bonding of smooth faces and it
couldn’t withstand a peeling force of high aspect ratio
millimeter structures in the process.
From the evaluation, for fabricating millimeter structures,
we should design easy-to-fabricate structures like the cone,
and modify the shape or properties of the boundary between
the crosslinked SU-8 and the uncrosslinked SU-8 at the
bonding step.
3.4. Application
A microﬂuidic device was fabricated as an application and
evaluated by a ﬂuid transportation test. Figure 9 shows the
ﬂuid transportation test; the left image shows the injection of
microsphere suspension into the fabricated microﬂuidic
device and the right image shows the ﬂuorescent microscopic
image of the channel during the ﬂuid transportation. As
shown in the right image, ﬂowing microspheres were

SDDL10-6

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58, SDDL10 (2019)

T. Tamura and T. Suzuki

Fig. 9. (Color online) Fluid transportation test. Left image is a photograph of the PDMS microﬂuidic device fabricated by the proposed technique. The
microﬂuidic device has a channel of width 500 μm and height 200 μm. The channel has line-and-space patterns of 100 μm, 50 μm, and 25 μm. Right image is
the ﬂuorescent image of ﬂuid transportation test. The suspension of microspheres with a diameter of 2 μm was injected into the microﬂuidic device using a
syringe pump at the ﬂow rate of 1 μl min−1.

observed in the channel having the micrometer line-andspaces pattern.
Since the millimeter interfaces and the micrometer channel
were seamlessly fabricated by our fabrication technique, it is
not necessary to fabricate the interfaces after soft lithography.
In addition, the dead volume is reduced by seamlessly
fabricating the interfaces and the microchannel. Moreover,
the fabricated device worked efﬁciently as a microﬂuidic
device without suspension leakage.
The cross-sectional shape of the fabricated microchannel is
a rectangle that can be fabricated by general photolithography. Additionally, the cross-section of a microchannel can
be determined by 3D printing. So, it will be possible to
fabricate micrometer structures in a millimeter ﬂuidic channel
having a more complex cross-sectional shape.
4. Conclusions

In this study, we fabricated a mold of a microﬂuidic device
having micrometer structures and millimeter structures, and
evaluated three characteristics of the proposed fabrication
technique. First, micrometer to millimeter structures were
seamlessly fabricated with an error within ±5% in the
evaluation of fabrication accuracy. Second, the effect of
resist surface roughness on micrometer structures was seen in
the evaluation of surface roughness. Third, in the evaluation
of object shape, a 10 mm high SU-8 structure, difﬁcult for
general photolithography, was fabricated. Finally, the advantages of the proposed fabrication technique were conﬁrmed by the ﬂuid transportation test.
Acknowledgments

This research was partially supported by JSPS Science
Research Grant (JP17H03196) and JST PRESTO (Grant
No. JPMJPR15R3).
ORCID iDs

Takaaki Suzuki

https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2574-7971

1) C. Ho and Y. Tai, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 30, 579 (1998).
2) J. Maire and M. Nomura, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 53, 06JE09 (2014).

3) T. Tsukamoto, Y. Umino, S. Shiomi, K. Yamada, and T. Suzuki, Sci.
Technol. Adv. Mater. 19, 660 (2018).
4) J. Park et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 51, 081301 (2012).
5) S. Kumagai, C. Chang, J. Jeong, M. Kobayashi, T. Shimizu, and M. Sasaki,
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 55, 01AF01 (2016).
6) T. Shibata, T. Ozawa, Y. Ito, K. Yamamoto, and M. Nagai, Jpn. J. Appl.
Phys. 56, 017001 (2017).
7) J. Suzuki, Y. Onishi, K. Terao, H. Takao, F. Shimokawa, F. Oohira,
H. Miyagawa, T. Namazu, and T. Suzuki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 55, 06GP01
(2016).
8) Y. Chen, Microelectron. Eng. 135, 57 (2015).
9) H. Becker and U. Heim, Sens Actuators A Phys. 83, 130 (2000).
10) S. Moore, J. Gomez, D. Lek, B. H. You, N. Kim, and I. Song,
Microelectron. Eng. 162, 57 (2016).
11) C. M. B. Ho, S. H. Ng, K. H. H. Li, and Y. Yoon, Lab Chip. 15, 3627 (2015).
12) M. B. Dentry, J. R. Friend, and L. Y. Yeo, Lab Chip. 14, 750 (2014).
13) M. Singh et al., Lab Chip. 17, 2561 (2017).
14) K. C. Bhargava, B. Thompson, and N. Malmstadt, Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 111,
15013 (2014).
15) Y. L. Kong, I. A. Tamargo, H. Kim, B. N. Johnson, M. K. Gupta, T. Koh,
H. Chin, D. A. Steingart, B. P. Rand, and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett. 14,
7017 (2014).
16) M. Zarek, M. Layani, I. Cooperstein, E. Sachyani, D. Cohn, and
S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater. 28, 4449 (2016).
17) Y. Temiz, R. D. Lovchik, G. V. Kaigala, and E. Delamarche, Microelectron.
Eng. 132, 156 (2015).
18) C. K. Fredrickson and Z. H. Fan, Lab Chip. 4, 526 (2004).
19) S. H. Ng, Z. F. Wang, and N. F. de Rooij, Microelectron. Eng. 86, 1354
(2009).
20) J. M. Lee, M. Zhang, and W. Y. Yeong, Microﬂuid Nanoﬂuid. 20, 5 (2016).
21) A. O. Olanrewaju, A. Robillard, M. Dagher, and D. Juncker, Lab Chip 16,
3804 (2016).
22) M. J. Madou, Manufacturing Techniques for Microfabrication and
Nanotechnology (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2011) 3rd ed., p. 356.
23) C. Lin, G. Lee, B. Chang, and G. Chang, J. Micromech. Microeng. 12, 590
(2002).
24) A. del. Campo and C. Greiner, J. Micromech. Microeng. 17, R81 (2007).
25) Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 37, 550 (1998).
26) K. Kamei, Y. Mashimo, Y. Koyama, C. Fockenberg, M. Nakashima,
M. Nakajima, J. Li, and Y. Chen, Biomed. Microdevices 17, 36 (2015).
27) S. K. Mitra and S. Chakraborty, Microﬂuidics and Nanoﬂuidics Handbook
(CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2018) 1st ed., p. 231.
28) L. Xu, H. Lee, D. Jetta, and K. W. Oh, Lab Chip 15, 3962 (2015).
29) A. T. Cannistra and T. J. Suleski, J. Micro/Nanolith. MEMS MOEMS 9,
013025 (2010).
30) T. Tsukamoto, N. Furuya, T. Shimagami, R. Sato, F. Shimokawa,
K. Akimitsu, and T. Suzuki, Electron Comm Jpn. 101, 45 (2018).
31) S. Bhattacharya, A. Datta, J. M. Berg, and S. Gangopadhyay, J
Microelectromechanical Syst. 14, 590 (2005).
32) Y. Hwang, O. H. Paydar, and R. N. Candler, Sens Actuators A Phys. 226,
136 (2015).

SDDL10-7

© 2019 The Japan Society of Applied Physics

