NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Langmuir. 2003 March 4; 19(5): 1551–1556. doi:10.1021/la026417v.

Microfluidic Multicompartment Device for Neuroscience
Research†
Anne M. Taylor‡, Seog Woo Rhee‡, Christina H. Tu§, David H. Cribbs§, Carl W. Cotman§,
and Noo Li Jeon*,‡
‡ Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697
§ Institute of Brain Aging and Dementia, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This paper describes and characterizes a novel microfabricated neuronal culture device. This
device combines microfabrication, microfluidic, and surface micropatterning techniques to create
a multicompartment neuronal culturing device that can be used in a number of neuroscience
research applications. The device is fabricated in poly(dimethylsiloxane), PDMS, using soft
lithography techniques. The PDMS device is placed on a tissue culture dish (polystyrene) or glass
substrate, forming two compartments with volumes of less than 2 μL each. These two
compartments are separated by a physical barrier in which a number of micron-size grooves are
embedded to allow growth of neurites across the compartments while maintaining fluidic
isolation. Cells are plated into the somal (cell body) compartment, and after 3–4 days, neurites
extend into the neuritic compartment via the grooves. Viability of the neurons in the devices is
between 50 and 70% after 7 days in culture; this is slightly lower than but comparable to values
for a control grown on tissue culture dishes. Healthy neuron morphology is evident in both the
devices and controls. We demonstrate the ability to use hydrostatic pressure to isolate insults to
one compartment and, thus, expose localized areas of neurons to insults applied in soluble form.
Due to the high resistance of the microgrooves for fluid transport, insults are contained in the
neuritic compartment without appreciable leakage into the somal compartment for over 15 h.
Finally, we demonstrate the use of polylysine patterning in combination with the microfabricated
device to facilitate identification and visualization of neurons. The ability to direct sites of
neuronal attachment and orientation of neurite outgrowth by micropatterning techniques,
combined with fluidically isolated compartments within the culture area, offers significant
advantages over standard open culture methods and other conventional methods for manipulating
distinct neuronal microenvironments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

I. Introduction
A multicompartment culturing method for neuritic isolation was first described by
Campenot for primary cultures of sympathetic neurons.1,2 In this method, a tissue culture
dish is coated with collagen and parallel lines, spaced 200 μm apart, are scratched along the
surface of the dish. A three-compartment Teflon piece is sealed to a tissue culture dish with
silicone grease, and neurons are plated in the small central chamber of the Teflon piece.
Neurites grow outward into the two other compartments on either side, aligning parallel to
the scratches.1 Variations of the Campenot chamber have been used in studies of various
types of long projection neurons. However, to use cortical and hippocampal neuronal

†Part of the Langmuir special issue entitled The Biomolecular Interface.
*

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Phone: 949-824-9032. njeon@uci.edu.

Taylor et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cultures, it was necessary to optimize neuron outgrowth and redesign the chamber to allow
neurites to enter the outer compartment after only modest periods of outgrowth. Ivins et al.
developed such chambers with a relatively short barrier distance (150 μm versus 300 μm in
the classic Campenot chamber).3 These chambers used a glass coverslip fixed to hemisected
Teflon tubing using Sylgard 184 (Dow Corning, Corning, NY). A small amount of silicone
vacuum grease (Dow Corning) was applied to the bottom of the coverslip using a dissecting
microscope, and the whole apparatus was placed on the tissue culture dish. Neurites
extended through the vacuum grease barrier between the polystyrene and the coverslip, if
the vacuum grease barrier was sufficiently thin. The process of making these chambers was
time-consuming and the percentage of useful devices was less than 30%. In addition, the
chambers were not compatible with live cell imaging; thus, the effects of insults were
observed only after the chambers were removed and the cells were fixed.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this paper, we describe a new type of microfabricated neuronal device. This device can be
used in a number of neuroscience applications, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) research
where the ability to expose insults locally to portions of neurons is desired. The benefits of
microfabrication include a reduction in reagent usage, batch processing ability, and
reproducibility. In addition, we demonstrate the ability to micropattern the substrate of the
device in order to align the neurites. The device is created using soft lithography techniques
and has two separate compartments connected by micron-size grooves at the bottom of a
150 μm wide barrier. Within 4 days after embryonic neurons are plated in one compartment,
neurites are visible through the grooves and into the adjacent compartment. The small
grooves connecting the two chambers have enough resistance that a hydrostatic pressure
difference between the two compartments results in the ability to contain and isolate a
biomolecular insult (e.g., β-amyloid, MW = 3–4 kD) in the lesser volume compartment for
many hours. Compatibility of the device with neuronal culture and characterization of the
device for localized insult application were investigated.

II. Experimental Section
Fabrication of Neuronal Devices

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The neuron culture device was fabricated in poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) using rapid
prototyping and soft lithography following published procedures.4,5 The master for the
device was fabricated by patterning two layers of photoresist (Figure 1). A 20 000 dpi highresolution printer (CAD/Art Services, San Diego, CA) was used to generate the first
transparency mask from a CAD file in order to create the microchannels (10 μm wide,
spaced 50 μm apart). SU-8 5 (Microchem, Newton, MA) photoresist was spun on an airplasma-cleaned silicon wafer at a rate of 4000 rpm for 60 s to obtain an approximate
thickness of 3 μm. The transparency mask was used to pattern the SU-8 5 photoresist. SU-8
50 was used as a second layer and spun at1000 rpm for 60 s. The second mask was used to
create the chamber areas; this mask was printed at 5080 dpi with a resolution of
approximately 35 μm and aligned to the first pattern. After developing, the wafer was placed
in a clean Petri dish and was treated with (tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl)
trichlorosilane to facilitate removal of the PDMS from the master mold. PDMS was made
using a 10:1 ratio of prepolymer and catalyst. The Petri dish containing the wafer was then
placed in a dry oven for 1 h at 70 °C. Ethanol was used to sterilize the devices.
Glass coverslips (22 mm × 30 mm, no. 1 thickness, Proper) were cleaned by sonication in an
ethanol solution for 30 min and then treated in an air plasma cleaner for 10 min to remove
residual materials from the surfaces. The tissue culture dishes and glass coverslips were
coated with poly-L-lysine (Sigma) at 50 μg/mL in sterile H2O for 2 h at room temperature.
The devices and tissue culture dishes were air-dried overnight before use.

Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 3

Culture of Embryonic Rat Cortical Neurons

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Primary cultures of E18 rat cortical neurons were prepared as described previously.3 Briefly,
cortexes of E18 rat embryos were dissected in CMF-HBSS [calcium- and magnesium-free
Hanks' balanced salt solution (HBSS) containing 1 mM pyruvate, 4.2 mM sodium
bicarbonate, and 0.3% bovine serum albumin (BSA)], rinsed with CMF, and resuspended in
a trypsin solution (0.125% trypsin in CMF-HBSS containing 0.5 mM EDTA) for 7 min at 37
°C or 25 min at ambient temperature. Trypsinization was stopped with Dulbecco's modified
Eagle's medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal calf serum, the tissue was centrifuged at
1000 rpm for 1 min, and the resulting cell pellet was resuspended in 2 mL of culture
medium (Neurobasal medium, Gibco 21103, containing B27 supplement, Gibco 17504,
GlutaMAX, Gibco 35050, and penicillin–streptomycin, Gibco 15070). Following trituration
through fire-polished Pasteur pipets with the diameter maximally 50% constricted, the cell
suspension was filtered through a 40 μm cell strainer, and viability was determined with
trypan blue. Cells were plated with densities from 1 to 4 × 106 cells/mL. For plating the
controls, the cell suspension was diluted 25-fold to obtain comparable cell density per area
as in the devices.
Microscopy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Phase contrast and epifluorescent images were taken using an inverted microscope Nikon
TE 300, aCCDcamera, and MetaMorph (Universal Imaging, PA). DG-4 was used as our
excitation light source which has an internal shutter controlled by MetaMorph in order to
take time-lapse images at different excitation wavelengths. We used a Prior motorized stage
to take images at multiple locations throughout the samples.
Substrate Patterning
We used two methods. First, micromolding in capillaries (MIMIC)6,7 was used to
selectively adsorb and pattern poly-L-lysine on the surface of tissue culture dishes. The
PDMS elastomeric mold, having 25 μm lines and spaces with a depth of 50 μm, was cast
from patterned silicon wafers generated with SU-8 50 by using photolithography. The
degassed 10:1 mixture of elastomer and curing agent was poured over a master pattern and
cured at 70 °C for 1 h. The PDMS mold was sterilized with ethanol and allowed to dry for at
least 1 h; a sterile tissue culture dish was used as the substrate for the mold. A drop of a 50
μg/mL solution of poly-L-lysine (PLL) in sterile deionized (DI) water was placed at an open
end of the network of channels, filling the channels by capillary action. After the channels
are filled, the solution was incubated for 1 h to allow adsorption onto the surface. After this
step, the PDMS mold was removed and a fresh buffer solution or sterile deionized water was
used to wash away the excess solution.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The second method of patterning, microcontact printing, was used to create poly-L-lysine
lines on coverglass; this technique has been described previously.8 The PDMS elastomeric
stamp having 25 μm lines and spaces with a depth of 10 μm was cast from patterned silicon
wafers generated with SU-8 10 by using photolithography. The degassed 10:1 mixture of
elastomer and curing agent was poured over a master pattern and cured at 70 °C for 1 h. The
elastomer stamp was peeled away from the master pattern after cooling. The ink was
prepared under ambient atmosphere using a 5 mg/mL solution of octadecyltrichlorosilane
(OTS) in a hexane solvent. The patterned face of the PDMS stamp was coated with a
solution of OTS by the spin-coating technique at 1500 rpm for 30 s, dried in a stream of
argon for 30 s, and then placed on top of a precleaned glass surface and kept in contact with
the inked stamp for 30 s. After contact printing, the OTS-patterned sample was rinsed
thoroughly in isopropyl alcohol and immersed in a 50 μg/mL solution of PLL in water for 2
h. The sample was rinsed in water and dried. Micropatterns on the glass substrates were
verified using fluorescence microscopy; the micropatterned surface was exposed to a
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

solution of 10 μg/mL fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) in
PBS (pH 7.4, 50 mM) at 37 °C for 30 min: the terminal −NH2 group reacts with the
isothiocyanate group of FITC yielding FITC-conjugated PLL patterns.9 The patterned glass
substrate was then washed with DI water and ethanol.

III. Results and Discussion
Design of Neuronal Devices

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The neuronal culture devices were fabricated in PDMS for the following reasons: (1) PDMS
is optically transparent and well suited for live cell imaging, (2) many molds can be made
from the same master with reproducible results, (3) PDMS can be covalently sealed to glass
using plasma bonding, and (4) a watertight seal can also be made with polystyrene or other
flat substrates by conformal contact. Both glass and polystyrene tissue culture dishes can be
used as substrates for the device. The neuritic and somal compartments are connected by
120 grooves, 10 μm wide, 3 μm high, and 150 μm in length. The grooves are spaced 50 μm
apart to prevent the grooves from collapsing. The size of the grooves is sufficiently small
that dissociated neurons during loading do not pass over to the adjoining neuritic
compartment. This design simplifies the loading process and allows selective placement of
neurons in one compartment. There are four holes (8 mm in diameter) in each PDMS device,
two at either end of each compartment, which serve as loading inlets and cell medium
reservoirs for nutrient and gas exchange. When small holes (2.3 mm diameter) were used,
the devices quickly dried out after a few days. Even if cell culture medium was added
frequently, there was low cell viability with these small holes due to poor exchange of
nutrients, wastes, and gases such as CO2. The volume in each covered compartment (i.e.,
without the reservoirs) is less than 2 μL. In comparison, the combined reservoirs for each
compartment can hold up to 400 μL. By having such small culture volumes, reagent
amounts can be reduced from traditional culturing methods.
After approximately 3–4 days of growth, neurites from the somal compartment extend into
the neuritic compartment. The rate of neurite outgrowth in our cultures was between 50 and
100 μm per day. After 7 days, or when an insult is desired, 15 μL of medium can be
transferred from the neuritic compartment to the somal compartment, leaving a net volume
difference of 30 μL (assuming the volumes in the two compartments have equilibrated
during the past 7 days). A 5 μL solution containing the insult can then be administered to the
neuritic side. When performing these operations, we are careful to add and withdraw
equivalent amounts to wells on the same side in order to minimize convective flow effects.
Viability of Neurons inside the Microfabricated Device

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Viability of neurons in the device is important because it demonstrates that the neurons are
healthy and not adversely affected by the device microenvironment and the materials that
were used in fabrication. We compared the viability of neurons inside the microfabricated
device with a control (tissue culture dish) after 7 days of culture. The viability was assessed
using calcein AM and ethidium homodimer live/dead stain (Molecular Probes). Results are
shown in Figure 2. Viability in the device was approximately 10–20% lower than in tissue
culture controls. We noticed that the viability of neurons was very sensitive to the cell
density. To get accurate viability data, we used similar cell densities in the devices and
controls. We used a plating density of 3 × 106 cells/mL for the devices and diluted this 1:25
for the tissue culture controls which gave us an average of 1.5 × 105 cells/cm2 for both
devices and controls. For each experiment, three devices and one control were used. If the
three devices were judged to be equivalent, live/dead staining was done on only one of the
samples. Morphologically, the cells in the devices were equivalent to the controls as shown
in Figure 2A,B. The slightly lower viability inside the devices may be due to increased salt

Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

concentration from evaporation and lower nutrient and gas exchange due to the smaller total
volume of media. Also, an increased ratio of dead cells may get trapped in the device
because of the small compartment height (100 μm).
Targeted Insult Application, Isolation, and Characterization

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For the device to be useful, we needed to determine and extend the length of time that the
insult is isolated in the neuritic compartment with minimum migration/diffusion into the
somal compartment. To determine the time when leakage will occur, we used fluorescent
dyes to visualize infiltration of fluid from one chamber to another. Three devices were
prepared by contact sealing the PDMS top to the polylysine-coated tissue culture dish. The
microfabricated device was filled with PBS (∼200 μL in each somal and neuritic chamber)
and placed in a water-saturated incubator for 12 h for the fluid levels to equalize. The
following procedure was used to create hydrostatic pressure between the chambers: First
125 μL of PBS was added to the somal compartment, dividing the volume between the two
reservoirs. Then, 100 μL of fluorescein (6 μM) in PBS was quickly added to the neuritic
compartment, again, dividing the volume between the two reservoirs. The slightly higher
volume on the somal side caused a slow net flow of liquid from the somal to the neuritic
compartment that acts against leakage or diffusion of fluorescein from the neuritic to the
somal compartment. Fluorescence images were taken every half hour for over 15 h using an
exposure time of 200 ms with a FITC filter at three separate locations in each side of the
somal and neuritic chamber. Intensity measurements were obtained by recording the average
intensity reading of each image. In each adjoining chamber, three images were averaged for
each half-hour time increment. The data were then normalized to the maximum intensity
reading. Results from two devices on polystyrene dishes were averaged to plot Figure 3C.
Similar results were obtained for devices on glass (data not shown).
Figure 3C shows the fluorescence intensity of fluorescein in the somal and neuritic
compartment as a function of time. The graph clearly indicates that fluorescein is isolated in
the neuritic side throughout the period of measurement. The fluorescence intensity in the
neuritic compartment is at background levels (below 7% of the maximum intensity) for over
15 h. The decrease in fluorescence intensity on the neuritic side is due to slow dilution from
the somal side. This dilution causes a reduction in fluorescence intensity to 50% after 4 h.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To illustrate the function and effectiveness of the device, we cultured neurons in the
microfabricated device allowing the neurites to extend over to the neuritic compartment.
Figure 4A is a phase contrast micrograph of the neurons in the microfabricated device after
4 days in culture. Texas Red dextran (10 kDa) and calcein AM (1 kDa) were added into the
neuritic compartment 1 h before taking the fluorescence micrograph, Figure 4B. A slight
pressure head, corresponding to a volume differential of 20 μL of medium, was established
in the somal side in order to ensure that dextran or calcein AM did not migrate from the
neuritic to the somal side. Texas Red dextran was used to simulate the insult in the neuritic
compartment and is clearly delineated by the barrier boundary (Figure 4B). Since calcein
AM was added to the neuritic compartment, only the neurons with processes entering this
compartment were illuminated. The phase contrast image shows additional neurons that
were not stained with calcein AM because they did not have processes extending into the
neuritic compartment; this illustrates that the neuritic compartment is fluidically isolated.
Substrate Micropatterning
In addition to simply isolating somas from their processes, we have also been able to pattern
the growth of neurites on the substrate inside the microfabricated device. Micropatterning of
the cells and their processes facilitates identification of cells and improves visualization of
results. For instance, if one needs to investigate the disruption in transport of cellular cargos

Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

such as mitochondria after injury to distal neuronal processes, it is helpful to determine the
direction of transport by identifying the relative position of a soma with respect to its
neurites. In a random culture on a tissue culture dish, due to entangled network neurites and
axons, this simple determination cannot be performed easily. If the cell body is positioned in
one side of the device (on the somal side) and its processes are guided and oriented in a
predetermined direction, the determination of anterograde or retrograde transport can be
greatly simplified.
We used MIMIC to pattern tissue culture dishes with polylysine. MIMIC represents a
technique that can pattern protein and other biological molecules.4,5,10 In MIMIC, the
PDMS mold is placed on the surface of the plastic substrate and makes conformal contact
with the substrate. The relief structure in the mold forms a network of empty channels. We
used sterile conditions for creating our MIMIC patterns. When the PDMS mold is removed,
a pattern of protein remains on the substrate. Figure 5A shows a fluorescence micrograph of
FITC, which was conjugated to amine groups in polylysine.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Microcontact printing (μCP) is an efficient method for patterning proteins, polymers, and
self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).4,5,10 Microcontact printing uses an elastomeric stamp
(PDMS with a patterned relief structure on its surface) to print a variety of molecules with
micron resolution. An elastomeric stamp can be made by curing PDMS against a
microfabricated master.4 The surface is coated with the desired molecules (for printing
proteins, the PDMS stamp will be exposed to an oxygen plasma to render its surface
hydrophilic) and placed in conformal contact with the substrate. If a stamp with strips of
raised regions separated by recessed regions is used, the molecules/proteins from the raised
region will be transferred onto the host substrate.4,5Figure 5B shows the FITC-conjugated
pattern of polylysine on glass using microcontact printing.
Figure 5C shows the growth of neurites across the barrier, via the grooves, along patterned
polylysine lines. The polylysine pattern was formed on a tissue culture dish using MIMIC.
Patterning of the substrates with polylysine prior to assembly with a PDMS device is
simplified because the polylysine pattern can be dried and even sterilized with ethanol.
This figure illustrates that the substrate patterning methods (microcontact printing and
MIMIC) can be combined with a microfabricated device to direct the sites of neuronal
attachment and the orientation of neurite outgrowth. Combined with fluidically isolated
compartments, this approach offers significant advantages over standard open culture
methods and other conventional methods for manipulating distinct neuronal
microenvironments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

IV. Conclusion
We have described a novel microfabricated neuronal culture device that allows directed
growth of neurites and isolation of neurites from their cell bodies. We demonstrated the
ability to use hydrostatic pressure to isolate insults to one compartment and, thus, expose
localized areas of neurons to insults. Due to the high resistance of the microgrooves for fluid
transport, insults are contained in the neuritic compartment without appreciable leakage into
the somal compartment for over 15 h. Finally, we demonstrate the use of polylysine
patterning in combination with the microfabricated device to facilitate identification and
visualization of neurons. The ability to direct the sites of neuronal attachment and the
orientation of neurite outgrowth by micropatterning techniques, combined with fluidically
isolated compartments within the culture area, offers significant advantages over standard
open culture methods and other conventional methods for manipulating distinct neuronal
microenvironments.

Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 7

Acknowledgments
The Institute of Brain Aging and Dementia thanks NIA (AG17765).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Campenot RB. Local control of neurite development by nerve growth factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1977;74(10):4516–4519. [PubMed: 270699]
2. Campenot RB. Development of sympathetic neurons in compartmentalized cultures. I. Local control
of neurite growth by nerve growth factor. Dev Biol 1982;93(1):1–12. [PubMed: 7128926]
3. Ivins KJ, Bui ETN, et al. β-Amyloid Induces Local Neurite Degeneration in Cultured Hippocampal
Neurons: Evidence for Neuritic Apoptosis. Neurobiol Dis 1998;5(5):365–378. [PubMed: 10069579]
4. Xia Y, Whitesides GM. Soft lithography. Angew Chem Int Ed 1998;37:550–75.
5. Whitesides GM, Ostuni E, Takayama S, Jiang X, Ingber D. Soft lithography in biology and
biochemistry. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 2001;3:335–373. [PubMed: 11447067]
6. Kim E, Xia Y, Whitesides GM. Polymer microstructures formed by moulding in capillaries. Nature
1995;376:581–584.
7. Kim E, Whitesides GM. Imbibition and flow of wetting liquids in noncircular capillaries. J Phys
Chem B 1997;101:855–863.
8. Xia Y, Whitesides GM. Extending Microcontact Printing as a Microlithographic Technique.
Langmuir 1997;13:2059–2067.
9. Schnaible V, Przybylski M. Identification of Fluorescein-5′-Isothiocyanate-Modification Sites in
Proteins by Electrospray-Ionization Mass Spectrometry. Bioconjugate Chem 1999;10:861–866.
10. Kane RS, Takayama S, Ostuni E, Ingber D, Whitesides GM. Patterning proteins and cells using
soft lithography. Biomaterials 1999;20:2363–2376. [PubMed: 10614942]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Schematic of the fabrication process for the neuron chamber. The top piece of the chamber
is fabricated in PDMS by molding against a master that has a two-level photoresist pattern.
Steps A and B show the formation of microgrooves (3 μm high and 10 μm wide) in the
master using a thin photoresist layer. The size of the grooves was designed to limit the
neurons in the somal chamber while allowing the growing neuritic processes to cross from
one chamber to another. Steps C and D show the fabrication step for main compartments for
soma and neurite chambers. Two chambers, separated by a barrier, form fluidically isolated
areas that each hold less than 2 μL of fluid (100 μm high, 1500 μm wide, and 8 mm long).
The top part of the device is formed by replica molding PDMS against the master (step E).
Releasing the PDMS and sealing it to a flat substrate completes the neuron chamber
fabrication (step F).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Viability of cultured primary neurons inside the microfabricated device versus tissue culture
controls. (A) Fluorescence micrograph of neurons cultured for 7 days inside the
microfabricated device. The PDMS top piece was sealed against a polylysine-coated tissue
culture dish. Live cells were stained with a fluorescent probe, calcein AM (Molecular
Probes). The box in the upper right-hand corner is a magnified section of the image showing
the detailed morphology of the neurons. (B) Fluorescence micrograph of neurons cultured
on a polylysine-coated tissue culture dish, without the PDMS device. Morphology typical of
healthy neurons was evident in both microfabricated devices and controls. (C) Graph of cell
viability inside the devices and controls after 7 days in culture (both used a polylysinecoated tissue culture dish as the substrate). The viability of cells cultured inside the
microfabricated devices is slightly lower (10–20%) than that in controls, but they are
generally comparable.

Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fluorescence intensity measurements of fluorescein (400 Da) were taken in somal and
neuritic compartments to characterize fluidic isolation. The left side is the somal chamber,
and the right is the neuritic chamber. The dotted white line delineates the boundaries of the
barrier. The microfabricated device was filled with PBS (∼200 μL in each somal and
neuritic chamber) and placed in a water-saturated incubator for 12 h for the fluid levels to
equalize. First, 125 μL of PBS was added to the somal compartment, dividing the volume
between the two reservoirs. Then 100 μL of fluorescein (6 μM) in PBS was quickly added to
the neuritic compartment, again, dividing the volume between the two reservoirs. The
slightly higher volume on the somal side caused a slow net flow of liquid from the somal to
the neuritic compartment that acts against leakage or diffusion of flourescein from the
neuritic to the somal compartment. (A) The initial fluorescence micrograph (t = 1 h) shows
that fluorescein is isolated to the neuritic compartment. (B) A fluorescence micrograph of
the same region after 15 h shows that the insult is still isolated to the neuritic compartment.
(C) A graph of normalized fluorescence intensity as a function of time is shown. The
fluorescence intensity in the somal side is below 7% of the maximum intensity (i.e., noise
level) for over 15 h, indicating that there is no leakage of fluorescein into the somal
compartment during this period. The fluorescence intensity of fluorescein in the neuritic
compartment decreases to 50% of the maximum due to dilution by the net flow of fluid from
the somal compartment.

Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Demonstration of neuronal culture inside the microfabricated device and effectiveness of
neuritic insult containment. Calcein AM and Texas Red dextran (MW = 10 kDa) were added
to the neuritic chamber 1 h before taking the micrographs. A positive hydrostatic pressure
difference was set up between the somal and neuritic chambers as explained in Figure 3. (A)
Phase micrograph of neurons extending processes to the neuritic chamber after 4 days in
culture. (B) Epifluorescence micrograph of the same region with cells stained with calcein
AM (green) and isolation of Texas Red dextran (red) in the neuritic chamber. Only the live
cells take up calcein and get fluorescently labeled. The micrograph clearly demonstrates
selective labeling of neurons that have processes extending into the neuritic side. Texas Red
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

dextran was added to the neuritic chamber simulating a typical insult (e.g., β-amyloid, MW
= 4 kDa). A slight pressure head, an additional 20 μL of medium in the somal chamber,
prevented the Texas Red dextran from migrating from the neuritic to the somal chamber.
Texas Red dextran is not detectable in the somal chamber.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

Taylor et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5.

The combination of substrate micropatterning and the microfabricated device allows
oriented growth of neuron processes across fluidically isolated chambers. (A) Fluorescence
micrograph of polylysine patterned lines conjugated with FITC on a polystyrene tissue
culture dish. MIMIC was used to pattern the lines with widths of 25 μm and a spacing of 25
μm. Bright lines indicate the region of patterned polylysine that was conjugated with FITC.
(B) Fluorescence micrograph of microcontact-printed polylysine lines conjugated with FITC
on a glass coverslip. Microcontact printing was used to pattern the lines with widths of 25
μm and a spacing of 25 μm. (C) Phase micrograph of neurites crossing the barrier from the
somal to the neuritic chamber via the grooves while following the polylysine pattern on a
tissue culture dish patterned by MIMIC (25 μm wide lines with 25 μm spacing).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

