NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Langmuir. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 August 18.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Langmuir. 2003 March 4; 19(5): 1551–1556. doi:10.1021/la026417v.

Microfluidic Multicompartment Device for Neuroscience
Research†
Anne M. Taylor‡, Seog Woo Rhee‡, Christina H. Tu§, David H. Cribbs§, Carl W. Cotman§,
and Noo Li Jeon*,‡
‡ Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697
§ Institute of Brain Aging and Dementia, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92697

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This paper describes and characterizes a novel microfabricated neuronal culture device. This
device combines microfabrication, microfluidic, and surface micropatterning techniques to create
a multicompartment neuronal culturing device that can be used in a number of neuroscience
research applications. The device is fabricated in poly(dimethylsiloxane), PDMS, using soft
lithography techniques. The PDMS device is placed on a tissue culture dish (polystyrene) or glass
substrate, forming two compartments with volumes of less than 2 μL each. These two
compartments are separated by a physical barrier in which a number of micron-size grooves are
embedded to allow growth of neurites across the compartments while maintaining fluidic
isolation. Cells are plated into the somal (cell body) compartment, and after 3–4 days, neurites
extend into the neuritic compartment via the grooves. Viability of the neurons in the devices is
between 50 and 70% after 7 days in culture; this is slightly lower than but comparable to values
for a control grown on tissue culture dishes. Healthy neuron morphology is evident in both the
devices and controls. We demonstrate the ability to use hydrostatic pressure to isolate insults to
one compartment and, thus, expose localized areas of neurons to insults applied in soluble form.
Due to the high resistance of the microgrooves for fluid transport, insults are contained in the
neuritic compartment without appreciable leakage into the somal compartment for over 15 h.
Finally, we demonstrate the use of polylysine patterning in combination with the microfabricated
device to facilitate identification and visualization of neurons. The ability to direct sites of
neuronal attachment and orientation of neurite outgrowth by micropatterning techniques,
combined with fluidically isolated compartments within the culture area, offers significant
advantages over standard open culture methods and other conventional methods for manipulating
distinct neuronal microenvironments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

I. Introduction
A multicompartment culturing method for neuritic isolation was first described by
Campenot for primary cultures of sympathetic neurons.1,2 In this method, a tissue culture
dish is coated with collagen and parallel lines, spaced 200 μm apart, are scratched along the
surface of the dish. A three-compartment Teflon piece is sealed to a tissue culture dish with
silicone grease, and neurons are plated in the small central chamber of the Teflon piece.
Neurites grow outward into the two other compartments on either side, aligning parallel to
the scratches.1 Variations of the Campenot chamber have been used in studies of various
types of long projection neurons. However, to use cortical and hippocampal neuronal

†Part of the Langmuir special issue entitled The Biomolecular Interface.
*

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Phone: 949-824-9032. njeon@uci.edu.

