Journal of Neuroscience Methods 308 (2018) 183–191

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Neuroscience Methods
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jneumeth

A microﬂuidic platform to study the eﬀects of GDNF on neuronal axon
entrapment
Ze Zhong Wanga, Matthew D. Woodb, Susan E. Mackinnonb, Shelly E. Sakiyama-Elbertc,

T

⁎

a

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, United States
Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States
c
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United States
b

A R T I C LE I N FO

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Peripheral nerve injury
Schwann cells
Neurite extension
Gene therapy

Background: One potential treatment strategy to enhance axon regeneration is transplanting Schwann Cells (SCs)
that overexpress glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF). Unfortunately, constitutive GDNF overexpression in vivo can result in failure of regenerating axons to extend beyond the GDNF source, a phenomenon
termed the “candy-store” eﬀect. Little is known about the mechanism of this axon entrapment in vivo.
New Method: We present a reproducible in vitro culture platform using a microﬂuidic device to model axon
entrapment and investigate mechanisms by which GDNF causes axon entrapment. The device is comprised of
three culture chambers connected by two sets of microchannels, which prevent cell soma from moving between
chambers but allow neurites to grow between chambers. Neurons from dorsal root ganglia were seeded in one
end chamber while the eﬀect of diﬀerent conditions in the other two chambers was used to study neurite
entrapment.
Results: The results showed that GDNF-overexpressing SCs (G-SCs) can induce axon entrapment in vitro. We also
found that while physiological levels of GDNF (100 ng/mL) promoted neurite extension, supra-physiological
levels of GDNF (700 ng/mL) induced axon entrapment.
Comparison with Existing Method: All previous work related to the “candy-store” eﬀect were done in vivo. Here,
we report the ﬁrst in vitro platform that can recapitulate the axonal entrapment and investigate the mechanism of
the phenomenon.
Conclusions: This platform facilitates investigation of the “candy-store” eﬀect and shows the eﬀects of high
GDNF concentrations on neurite outgrowth.

1. Introduction
Severe peripheral nerve injury (PNI) can have a devastating impact
on patients’ quality of life resulting in lifelong disabilities. Autologous
nerve grafting has been the standard of care for PNI, despite its major
disadvantage of donor site morbidity (Lundborg, 2000). Alternative
methods, such as acellular nerve grafts, are ineﬀective for large gaps
because of the lack of cells and regenerative factors within the graft
(Fox et al., 2005). Even with proper surgical reconstruction, functional
recovery can be incomplete (Moore et al., 2009). Although the peripheral nerve is capable of regeneration, the rate of axonal regeneration
is slow at 1–2 mm/day (Grinsell and Keating, 2014). Patients suﬀering
from proximal injuries, such as brachial plexus injuries, which can involve regeneration distances of up to a meter, may require 2–3 years for
axons to reach target muscles (Lundborg, 2000). However, chronic

denervation can result in quiescence of Schwann cells (SCs), which
leads to their precipitous decline in growth factor expression and a
progressive failure to promote axonal regeneration over time (Fox et al.,
2005). In addition, essentially irreversible changes to muscle occur by
12–18 months (Kobayashi et al., 1997), at which point functional recovery is unlikely. To treat these patients, it is critical to devise strategies to enhance axonal growth and prevent chronic denervation of
SCs to promote robust axon regeneration over long distances. One appealing strategy to improve recovery is to use exogenous growth factors
and/or SCs with exogenous growth factor expression to enhance axonal
regeneration.
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is one of these
potent growth factors involved in the normal regenerative process after
injury. GDNF has been shown to improve axonal regeneration in motor
neurons (Scheib and Höke, 2013) and a subset of sensory neurons (Wu-

Abbreviations: GDNF, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor; G-SC, GDNF-overexpressing Schwann Cells; PNI, peripheral nerve injury; SC, Schwann cells
⁎
Corresponding author.
E-mail address: sakiyama@utexas.edu (S.E. Sakiyama-Elbert).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2018.08.002
Received 7 March 2018; Received in revised form 1 August 2018; Accepted 2 August 2018
Available online 03 August 2018
0165-0270/ © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

